*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100050
*FIELD* TI
100050 AARSKOG SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
*FIELD* TX

DESCRIPTION

Aarskog syndrome is characterized by short stature and facial, limb, and
genital anomalies. One form of the disorder is X-linked (see 305400),
but there is also evidence for autosomal dominant and autosomal
recessive (227330) inheritance (summary by Grier et al., 1983).

CLINICAL FEATURES

Grier et al. (1983) reported father and 2 sons with typical Aarskog
syndrome, including short stature, hypertelorism, and shawl scrotum.
Stretchable skin was present in these patients.

INHERITANCE

Grier et al. (1983) tabulated the findings in 82 previously reported
cases of Aarskog syndrome and noted that X-linked recessive inheritance
was repeatedly suggested. However, their family had father-to-son
transmission, and a family reported by Welch (1974) had affected males
in 3 consecutive generations. Grier et al. (1983) suggested autosomal
dominant inheritance with strong sex-influence and possibly
ascertainment bias resulting from use of the shawl scrotum as a main
criterion.

Van de Vooren et al. (1983) studied a large family in which Aarskog
syndrome was segregating with variable expression in 3 generations and
with male-to-male transmission. Because 3 daughters of affected males
had no features of Aarskog syndrome and 2 sons of an affected male had
several features of the syndrome, van de Vooren et al. (1983) suggested
sex-influenced autosomal dominant inheritance.

*FIELD* RF
1. Grier, R. E.; Farrington, F. H.; Kendig, R.; Mamunes, P.: Autosomal
dominant inheritance of the Aarskog syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 15:
39-46, 1983.

2. van de Vooren, M. J.; Niermeijer, M. F.; Hoogeboom, A. J. M.:
The Aarskog syndrome in a large family, suggestive for autosomal dominant
inheritance. Clin. Genet. 24: 439-445, 1983.

3. Welch, J. P.: Elucidation of a 'new' pleiotropic connective tissue
disorder. Birth Defects Orig. Art. Ser. X(10): 138-146, 1974.

*FIELD* CS

Growth:
   Mild to moderate short stature

Head:
   Normocephaly

Hair:
   Widow's peak

Facies:
   Maxillary hypoplasia;
   Broad nasal bridge;
   Anteverted nostrils;
   Long philtrum;
   Broad upper lip;
   Curved linear dimple below the lower lip

Eyes:
   Hypertelorism;
   Ptosis;
   Down-slanted palpebral fissures;
   Ophthalmoplegia;
   Strabismus;
   Hyperopic astigmatism;
   Large cornea

Ears:
   Floppy ears;
   Lop-ears

Mouth:
   Cleft lip/palate

GU:
   Shawl scrotum;
   Saddle-bag scrotum;
   Cryptorchidism

Limbs:
   Brachydactyly;
   Digital contractures;
   Clinodactyly;
   Mild syndactyly;
   Transverse palmar crease;
   Lymphedema of the feet

Joints:
   Ligamentous laxity;
   Osteochondritis dissecans;
   Proximal finger joint hyperextensibility;
   Flexed distal finger joints;
   Genu recurvatum;
   Flat feet

Skin:
   Stretchable skin

Spine:
   Cervical spine hypermobility;
   Odontoid anomaly

Heme:
   Macrocytic anemia;
   Hemochromatosis

GI:
   Hepatomegaly;
   Portal cirrhosis;
   Imperforate anus;
   Rectoperineal fistula

Pulmonary:
   Interstitial pulmonary disease

Thorax:
   Sternal deformity

Inheritance:
   Sex-influenced autosomal dominant form;
   also X-linked form

*FIELD* CN
Nara Sobreira - updated: 4/22/2013

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
carol: 04/24/2013
carol: 4/22/2013
carol: 2/16/2011
alopez: 6/3/1997
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 7/7/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100070
*FIELD* TI
%100070 AORTIC ANEURYSM, FAMILIAL ABDOMINAL, 1; AAA1
;;ANEURYSM, ABDOMINAL AORTIC; AAA;;
ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSM
*FIELD* TX
One locus for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA1) maps to chromosome 19q13.

DESCRIPTION

Abdominal aortic aneurysm is a multifactorial disorder with multiple
genetic and environmental risk factors. The disorder may occur as part
of a heritable syndrome or in isolation (summary by Kuivaniemi et al.,
2003).

- Genetic Heterogeneity of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

Other mapped loci for abdominal aortic aneurysm include AAA2 (609782) on
chromosome 4q31; AAA3 (611891) on chromosome 9p21; and AAA4 (614375) on
chromosome 12q13.3.

CLINICAL FEATURES

Loosemore et al. (1988) described 2 brothers with abdominal aortic
aneurysm at ages 58 and 62 years, whose father died of ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm at the age of 72 years. Four other sibs died
of myocardial infarction at ages 47 to 61 years. Loosemore et al. (1988)
suggested that a deficiency of type III collagen (see 120180) might be
the basis for the aneurysm formation. The proportion of type III
collagen in forearm skin biopsies was cited as accurately reflective of
the proportion in the aorta and was said to have been low in the
brothers.

Ward (1992) looked for association of dilated peripheral arteries with
aortic aneurysmal disease by measuring the diameters of the common
femoral, popliteal, brachial, common carotid, internal carotid, and
external carotid arteries by color-flow duplex scan in 30 control
subjects and 36 patients with aortic aneurysm matched for age, sex,
smoking habits, and hypertension. Mean peripheral artery diameter was
significantly greater in patients with aortic aneurysms than in controls
at all measurement sites. Peripheral artery dilatation was identified at
sites that are seldom, if ever, involved in atherosclerosis. Ward (1992)
concluded that there is a generalized dilating diathesis in aortic
aneurysmal disease that may be unrelated to atherosclerosis.

In the study of Verloes et al. (1995), familial male cases showed a
significantly earlier age at rupture and a greater rupture rate as
compared with sporadic male cases, as well as a tendency (p less than
0.05) towards earlier age of diagnosis.

AAA occurs among approximately 1.5% of the male population older than 50
years of age. Several studies have indicated an increased frequency
among first-degree relatives of patients with AAA. Aneurysms of the
peripheral arteries (femoral, popliteal, and isolated iliac) are less
common than aortic aneurysms (Lawrence et al., 1995), and arteriomegaly
(diffuse aneurysmal disease) is even less common (Hollier et al., 1983).
Peripheral aneurysms and arteriomegaly carry a high risk for
complications such as rupture, embolism, or thrombosis.

INHERITANCE

Tilson and Seashore (1984) reported 50 families in which abdominal
aortic aneurysm had occurred in 2 or more first-degree relatives, mainly
males. In 29 families, multiple sibs (up to 4) were affected; in 2
families, 3 generations were affected; and in 15 families, persons in 2
generations were affected. Three complex pedigrees were observed: one in
which both parents and 3 sons were affected; one in which a man and his
paternal uncle were affected; and one in which a man and his father and
maternal great-uncle were affected. In the 'one-generation' families,
there were 3 with only females affected, including a set of identical
twins. The authors concluded that if a single gene is responsible, it is
likely to be autosomal but that a multigenic mechanism cannot be
excluded.

Clifton (1977) reported 3 affected brothers.

In North Carolina, Johnson et al. (1985) found that white males have a
frequency of abdominal aortic aneurysm about 3 times that in black
males, black females, or white females; all 3 of the latter groups had
about comparable frequencies. Frequency was ascertained by a survey of
autopsies and a survey of abdominal computed tomographic scans in
subjects over the age of 50 years.

Johansen and Koepsell (1986) compared the family histories of 250
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm with those of 250 control
subjects. Among the control subjects, 2.4% reported a first-degree
relative with an aneurysm, compared with 19.2% of the patients with
abdominal aortic aneurysm. This was taken to represent an estimated
11.6-fold increase in abdominal aortic aneurysm risk among persons with
an affected first-degree relative. The authors suggested that
noninvasive screening to detect early abdominal aortic aneurysm may be
warranted in the relatives of affected persons.

By ultrasound screening, Collin et al. (1988) found an abdominal aortic
aneurysm in 5.4% of men aged 65 to 74, and in 2.3% of men in this age
group the aneurysm was 4 cm or more in diameter.

Borkett-Jones et al. (1988) brought to 4 the number of reported sets of
identical twins concordant for abdominal aortic aneurysm. In a 9-year
prospective study of 542 consecutive patients undergoing operation for
abdominal aortic aneurysm, Darling et al. (1989) found that 82 (15.1%)
had a first-degree relative with an aneurysm as compared to 9 (1.8%) of
the control group of 500 patients of similar age and sex without
aneurysmal disease. Patients with familial abdominal aortic aneurysm
were more likely to be women (35% vs 14%), and men with familial
abdominal aortic aneurysm tended to be about 5 years younger than the
women. No significant difference was found between the patients with
nonfamilial and familial abdominal aortic aneurysms in anatomic extent,
multiplicity, associated occlusive disease, or blood type. The risk of
rupture was strongly correlated with familial disease and the presence
of a female member with aneurysm (63% vs 37%). Darling et al. (1989)
suggested the term 'black widow syndrome' because of the grim
significance of the presence of an affected female in the family.

On the basis of a study of first-degree relatives of 91 probands,
Majumder et al. (1991) rejected the nongenetic model and concluded that
the most parsimonious genetic model was that susceptibility to abdominal
aortic aneurysm is determined by a recessive gene at an autosomal
diallelic major locus.

Fitzgerald et al. (1995) assessed the incidence of abdominal aortic
aneurysm in the sibs of 120 patients known to have AAA. Twelve percent
of the sibs were found to have an aneurysm, including 22% of male sibs
but only 3% of female sibs. Male sibs with hypertension were more likely
to have AAA.

In the study of Verloes et al. (1995), relative risk for male sibs of a
male patient was 18. Segregation analysis with the mixed model gave
single gene effect with dominant inheritance as the most likely
explanation for the familial occurrence. The frequency of the morbid
allele was 1:250, and its age-related penetrance was not higher than
0.4.

As part of a review of abdominal aortic aneurysm as a multifactorial
process, Henney (1993) reviewed family studies and the molecular
genetics. In a review focused on surgical aspects, Ernst (1993)
commented that 'there is little support for atherosclerosis as the
unitary cause...several factors appear to have an important role,
including familial clustering...'

Through questionnaire and telephone inquiries, Verloes et al. (1995)
collected family data on 324 probands with abdominal aortic aneurysm and
determined multigenerational pedigrees on 313 families, including 39
with multiple affected patients. There were 276 sporadic cases (264 men;
12 women); 81 cases belonged to multiplex pedigrees (76 men; 5 women).

Baird et al. (1995) collected information from 126 probands with
abdominal aortic aneurysm and 100 controls (cataract surgery patients)
concerning AAA. Of 427 sibs of probands, 19 (4.4%) had probable or
definite AAA, compared with 5 (1.1%) of 451 sibs of controls. The
lifetime cumulative risks of AAA at age 83 were 11.7% and 7.5%,
respectively. The risk of AAA began at an earlier age and increased more
rapidly for probands' sibs than for controls' sibs. The risk comparison,
based on the results of ultrasound screening of 54 geographically
accessible sibs probands and the 100 controls, showed a similar pattern.
AAA was found on ultrasound in 10 sibs of probands, or 19%, compared to
8% of controls.

Lawrence et al. (1998) constructed pedigrees for first-degree relatives
of 140 patients who received the diagnosis of peripheral arterial
aneurysm, arteriomegaly, or AAA from 1988 through 1996 in Salt Lake
City, Utah. Patients with peripheral arterial aneurysm (n = 40) had a
10% (4 of 40) familial incidence rate of an aneurysm, patients with AAA
(n = 86) had a 22% (19 of 86) familial incidence rate, and patients with
arteriomegaly (n = 14) had a 36% (5 of 14) familial incidence rate. AAA
was the aneurysm diagnosed most commonly among first-degree relatives
(86%; 24 of 28). Most aneurysms (85%) occurred among men. Lawrence et
al. (1998) suggested that relatives of patients with AAA, peripheral
arterial aneurysm, or arteriomegaly may be screened by means of a
physical examination for peripheral aneurysmal disease. Screening by
means of ultrasound examination of the aorta should be limited to
first-degree relatives of patients with aortic aneurysms or
arteriomegaly.

Rossaak et al. (2000) cited a familial incidence of 11 to 20% for AAA.

Kuivaniemi et al. (2003) identified 233 families with at least 2
individuals diagnosed with abdominal aortic aneurysms. The families
originated from 9 different nationalities, but all were white. There
were 653 aneurysm patients in these families, with an average of 2.8
cases per family. Most of the families were small, with only 2 affected
individuals. There were, however, 6 families with 6, 3 with 7, and 1
with 8 affected individuals. Most of the probands (82%) and the affected
relatives (77%) were male, and the most common relationship to the
proband was brother. Most of the families (72%) appeared to show an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, whereas in 58 families (25%),
abdominal aortic aneurysms were inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner, and in 8 families, the familial aggregation could be explained
by autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance. In the 66
families where abdominal aortic aneurysms were inherited in a dominant
manner, 141 transmissions of the disease from 1 generation to another
were identified, and male-to-male, male-to-female, female-to-male, and
female-to-female transmissions occurred in 46%, 11%, 32%, and 11%,
respectively. Kuivaniemi et al. (2003) concluded that abdominal aortic
aneurysm is a multifactorial disorder with multiple genetic and
environmental risk factors.

PATHOGENESIS

Newman et al. (1994) and others have pointed to a role of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in end-stage AAA. MMP activity is closely
controlled by the balance of its activators, such as plasmin, and its
inhibitors. A mutation that reduces the transcription of plasminogen
activator inhibitor (PAI1; 173360) would result in an increase in the
activity of tissue plasminogen activator (PLAT; 173370). This in turn
would increase the conversion of inactive plasminogen (173350) to its
active form, plasmin, and increase the zymogen activation of MMPs.
Jean-Claude et al. (1994) observed increased levels of plasmin in AAAs.

It is possible that aneurysms develop due to structural alterations in
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as elastin (130160), collagens,
and proteoglycans. Such alterations in type III collagen (see 120180),
however, have been shown to be rare causes of both abdominal aortic
aneurysms and intracranial aneurysms (see 105800). Another alternative
is that the enzymes degrading the structural molecules contribute to
aneurysm formation. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are connective
tissue-degrading enzymes that could play a role in structural
alterations of the arterial wall through the degradation of collagens
and other extracellular matrix molecules. MMP3 (185250), MMP9 (120361),
and PAI1 are present at increased levels in abdominal aortic aneurysms
(Yoon et al., 1999). Promoters of these genes contain polymorphisms with
alleles that exhibit different transcriptional activities in vitro.

Tromp et al. (2004) determined the relative expression of MMP13 (600108)
in aortic tissue samples from 36 patients who underwent abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair operations and from 20 nonaneurysmal autopsy samples.
MMP13 was expressed in all parts of the aorta, and its expression was
elevated in the aneurysmal sac. In further studies using MMP13-specific
antibody, Tromp et al. (2004) demonstrated that MMP13 protein was
present in the aneurysmal wall.

Yoshimura et al. (2005) observed a high level of phosphorylated JNK
(MAPK8; 601158) in human AAA tissue. By DNA microarray analysis of rat
aortic vascular smooth muscle cells, they demonstrated that Jnk programs
a gene expression pattern that cooperatively enhances degradation of the
extracellular matrix, while suppressing biosynthetic enzymes of the ECM,
such as Lox (153455) and Plod1 (153454). In human monocyte-macrophage
cells and AAA tissue, JNK played a role in MMP9 secretion. Selective
inhibition of Jnk in vivo not only prevented the development of AAA but
also caused regression of established AAA in 2 mouse models. Yoshimura
et al. (2005) concluded that JNK is a proximal signaling molecule in the
pathogenesis of AAA that acts by promoting abnormal ECM metabolism.

There are suggestions from several sources that AAA and atherosclerosis
may be different diseases. In their AAA population, Rossaak et al.
(2000) found an incidence of diabetes mellitus of 6%. They suggested
that this relatively low incidence in patients with AAA contrasted with
that in atherosclerotic disease and lent support to the notion that
these 2 disorders are indeed distinct. The apparent association of a
PAI1 polymorphism (4G/5G; 173360.0002) with familial AAA (see MOLECULAR
GENETICS) was another observation that questioned the idea that
atherosclerosis causes AAAs: whereas the 4G variant of PAI1 shows a
protective role in AAA, it is undesirable in the context of coronary
artery disease and atherosclerosis (Harris, 2001).

MAPPING

Shibamura et al. (2004) performed a whole-genome scan of AAA using
affected relative-pair (ARP) linkage analysis that included covariates
to allow for genetic heterogeneity. They found strong evidence of
linkage (lod = 4.64) to a region near marker D19S433 at 51.88 cM on
chromosome 19 with 36 families (75 ARPs) when including sex and the
number of affected first-degree relatives of the proband as covariates.
They then genotyped 83 additional families for the same markers and
typed additional markers for all families and obtained a lod score of
4.75 with sex, number of affected first-degree relatives, and their
interaction as covariates, near marker D19S416 (58.69 cM).

- Pending Confirmation

Elmore et al. (2009) conducted a genomewide association study in 123 AAA
cases and 112 controls matched for age, sex, and smoking history, and
identified 4 SNPs associated with AAA in strong LD within a haplotype
block on chromosome 3p12.3. One of the SNPs from this region, dbSNP
rs7635818, was genotyped in 502 AAA cases and 736 controls (p = 0.017)
and a replication set of 448 cases and 410 controls (p = 0.013; combined
p = 0.0028 and combined OR = 1.33); analysis in the subset of 391 cases
and 241 controls with a smoking history showed an even stronger
association (p = 0.00041; OR, 1.80). Elmore et al. (2009) noted that the
AAA-associated region is located approximately 200 kbp upstream of the
CNTN3 gene (601325) transcription start site.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Yoon et al. (1999) performed association studies using polymorphisms in
the MMP3 (185250), MMP9 (120361), and PAI1 (173360) genes and DNA
isolated from 47 AAA patients, 57 intracranial aneurysm (IA) patients,
and 174 controls, all from Finland. The frequency of the 5A MMP3 allele
(185250.0001) was somewhat higher in the AAA than in the control group
(corrected p = 0.0609), whereas the MMP3 allele frequencies in the IA
group did not differ from those of the controls. These findings
suggested that the transcriptionally more active 5A MMP3 allele might be
a genetic risk factor for AAA among Finns. The findings were in
agreement with previous studies demonstrating higher levels of MMP3
expression in AAA than in control tissues. Yoon et al. (1999) found that
PAI1 and MMP9 genotypes, including the PAI1 4G/5G polymorphism
(173360.0002), did not associate with aneurysms.

Noting that the 5G variant of the PAI1 4G/5G polymorphism is associated
with less inhibition of the plasminogen activators and, consequently,
increased conversion of plasminogen to plasmin and increased activation
of MMPs, Rossaak et al. (2000) studied the ratios of the 4G:5G genotypes
in 190 patients with AAA, including 39 patients with strong family
histories, and 163 controls, and found that 26% of patients with
familial AAA were homozygous 5G compared with 13% of the control
population. The 4G allele frequency was 0.47 in the familial AAAs,
compared with 0.62 in the nonfamilial patients (P = 0.02) and 0.61 in
the control population (p = 0.03).

Histologically, AAAs are characterized by signs of chronic inflammation,
destructive remodeling of the extracellular matrix, and depletion of
vascular smooth muscle cells (Steinmetz et al., 2003). Ogata et al.
(2005) hypothesized that genes involved in these events could harbor
changes and make individuals more susceptible to aneurysms. They
analyzed 387 Caucasian individuals with AAA and 425 controls for 14
polymorphisms in 13 candidate genes, and found significant association
between variation in the TIMP1 gene (305370) and AAA in males without a
family history (p = 0.0047 for nt+434 and p = 0.015 for dbSNP
rs2070584).

Baas et al. (2010) performed an association study of SNPs in the
TGF-beta receptor genes TGFBR1 (190181) and TGFBR2 (190182) and AAA in a
Dutch population. In the stage 1 analysis of 376 cases and 648 controls,
3 of the 4 TGFBR1 SNPs and 9 of the 28 TGFBR2 SNPs had a p value of less
than 0.07. Genotyping of these SNPs in an independent cohort of 360
cases and 376 controls in stage 2 confirmed association (p less than
0.05) for the same allele of 1 SNP in TGFBR1 and 2 SNPs in TGFBR2. Joint
analysis of the 736 cases and 1,024 controls showed statistically
significant associations of these SNPs, which sustained after proper
correction for multiple testing (TGFBR1 dbSNP rs1626340, OR = 1.32, 95%
CI 1.11-1.56, p = 0.001; TGFBR2 dbSNP rs1036095, OR = 1.32, 95% CI
1.12-1.54, p = 0.001; dbSNP rs4522809, OR = 1.28, 95% CI 1.12-1.46, p =
0.0004). Baas et al. (2010) concluded that genetic variation in TGFBR1
and TGFBR2 associate with AAA in the Dutch population.

*FIELD* SA
Norrgard et al. (1985); Norrgard et al. (1984)
*FIELD* RF
1. Baas, A. F.; Medic, J.; van't Slot, R.; de Kovel, C. G.; Zhernakova,
A.; Geelkerken, R. H.; Kranendonk, S. E.; van Sterkenburg, S. M.;
Grobbee, D. E.; Boll, A. P.; Wijmenga, C.; Blankensteijn, J. D.; Ruigrok,
Y. M.: Association of the TGF-beta receptor genes with abdominal
aortic aneurysm. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 240-244, 2010.

2. Baird, P. A.; Sadovnick, A. D.; Yee, I. M. L.; Cole, C. W.; Cole,
L.: Sibling risks of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Lancet 346: 601-604,
1995.

3. Borkett-Jones, H. J.; Stewart, G.; Chilvers, A. S.: Abdominal
aortic aneurysms in identical twins. J. Roy. Soc. Med. 81: 471-472,
1988.

4. Clifton, M. A.: Familial abdominal aortic aneurysms. Brit. J.
Surg. 64: 765-766, 1977.

5. Collin, J.; Araujo, L.; Walton, J.; Lindsell, D.: Oxford screening
programme for abdominal aortic aneurysm in men aged 65 to 74 years. Lancet 332:
613-615, 1988. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Darling, R. C., III; Brewster, D. C.; Darling, R. C.; LaMuraglia,
G. M.; Moncure, A. C.; Cambria, R. P.; Abbott, W. M.: Are familial
abdominal aortic aneurysms different? J. Vasc. Surg. 10: 39-43,
1989.

7. Elmore, J. R.; Obmann, M. A.; Kuivaniemi, H.; Tromp, G.; Gerhard,
G. S.; Franklin, D. P.; Boddy, A. M.; Carey, D. J.: Identification
of a genetic variant associated with abdominal aortic aneurysms on
chromosome 3p12.3 by genome wide association. J. Vasc. Surg. 49:
1525-1531, 2009.

8. Ernst, C. B.: Abdominal aortic aneurysm. New Eng. J. Med. 328:
1167-1172, 1993.

9. Fitzgerald, P.; Ramsbottom, D.; Burke, P.; Grace, P.; McAnen, O.;
Croke, D. T.; Collins, P.; Johnson, A.; Bouchier-Hayes, D.: Abdominal
aortic aneurysm in the Irish population. Brit. J. Surg. 82: 483-486,
1995.

10. Harris, E. L.: Personal Communication. Dunedin, New Zealand 
11/27/2001.

11. Henney, A. M.: Abdominal aortic aneurysm: molecular genetics. Lancet 341:
216-217, 1993.

12. Hollier, L. H.; Stanson, A. W.; Gloviczki, P.; Pairolero, P. C.;
Joyce, J. W.; Bernatz, P. E.; Cherry, K. J.: Arteriomegaly: classification
and morbid implications of diffuse aneurysmal disease. Surgery 93:
700-708, 1983.

13. Jean-Claude, J.; Newman, K. M.; Li, H.; Gregory, A. K.; Tilson,
M. D.: Possible key role for plasmin in the pathogenesis of abdominal
aortic aneurysms. Surgery 116: 472-478, 1994.

14. Johansen, K.; Koepsell, T.: Familial tendency for abdominal aortic
aneurysms. JAMA 256: 1934-1936, 1986.

15. Johnson, G., Jr.; Avery, A.; McDougal, E. G.; Burnham, S. J.;
Keagy, B. A.: Aneurysms of the abdominal aorta: incidence in blacks
and whites in North Carolina. Arch. Surg. 120: 1138-1140, 1985.

16. Kuivaniemi, H.; Shibamura, H.; Arthur, C.; Berguer, R.; Cole,
C. W.; Juvonen, T.; Kline, R. A.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G.; Norrgard,
O.; Pals, G.; Powell, J. T.; Rainio, P.; Sakalihasan, N.; van Vlijmen-van
Keulen, C.; Verloes, A.; Tromp, G.: Familial abdominal aortic aneurysms:
collection of 233 multiplex families. J. Vasc. Surg. 37: 340-345,
2003.

17. Lawrence, P. F.; Lorenzo-Rivero, S.; Lyon, J. L.: The incidence
of iliac, femoral, and popliteal artery aneurysms in hospitalized
patients. J.  Vasc. Surg. 22: 409-415, 1995.

18. Lawrence, P. F.; Wallis, C.; Dobrin, P. B.; Bhirangi, K.; Gugliuzza,
N.; Galt, S.; Kraiss, L.: Peripheral aneurysms and arteriomegaly:
is there a familial pattern? J. Vasc. Surg. 28: 599-605, 1998.

19. Loosemore, T. M.; Child, A. H.; Dormandy, J. A.: Familial abdominal
aortic aneurysms. J. Roy. Soc. Med. 81: 472-473, 1988.

20. Majumder, P. P.; St. Jean, P. L.; Ferrell, R. E.; Webster, M.
W.; Steed, D. L.: On the inheritance of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 48: 164-170, 1991.

21. Newman, K. M.; Malon, A. M.; Shin, R. D.; Scholes, J. V.; Ramey,
W. G.; Tilson, M. D.: Matrix metalloproteinases in abdominal aortic
aneurysm: characterization, purification, and their possible sources. Connect.
Tissue Res. 30: 265-276, 1994.

22. Norrgard, O.; Angquist, K.-A.; Johnson, O.: Familial aortic aneurysms:
serum concentrations of triglyceride, cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol
and (VLDL + LDL)-cholesterol. Brit. J. Surg. 72: 113-116, 1985.

23. Norrgard, O.; Rais, O.; Angquist, K. A.: Familial occurrence
of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Surgery 95: 650-656, 1984.

24. Ogata, T.; Shibamura, H.; Tromp, G.; Sinha, M.; Goddard, K. A.
B.; Sakalihasan, N.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G. L.; Arthur, C.; Sueda,
T.; Land, S.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Genetic analysis of polymorphisms in
biologically relevant candidate genes in patients with abdominal aortic
aneurysms. J. Vasc. Surg. 41: 1036-1042, 2005.

25. Rossaak, J. I.; van Rij, A. M.; Jones, G. T.; Harris, E. L.:
Association of the 4G/5G polymorphism in the promoter region of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 with abdominal aortic aneurysms. J. Vasc. Surg. 31:
1026-1032, 2000.

26. Shibamura, H.; Olson, J. M.; van Vlijmen-van Keulen, C.; Buxbaum,
S. G.; Dudek, D. M.; Tromp, G.; Ogata, T.; Skunca, M.; Sakalihasan,
N.; Pals, G.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G. L.; Defawe, O.; Verloes, A.;
Arthur, C.; Lossing, A. G.; Burnett, M.; Sueda, T.; Kuivaniemi, H.
: Genome scan for familial abdominal aortic aneurysm using sex and
family history as covariates suggests genetic heterogeneity and identifies
linkage to chromosome 19q13. Circulation 109: 2103-2108, 2004.

27. Steinmetz, E. F.; Buckley, C.; Thompson, R. W.: Prospects for
the medical management of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc. Endovascular
Surg. 37: 151-163, 2003.

28. Tilson, M. D.; Seashore, M. R.: Fifty families with abdominal
aortic aneurysms in two or more first-order relatives. Am. J. Surg. 147:
551-553, 1984.

29. Tromp, G.; Gatalica, Z.; Skunca, M.; Berguer, R.; Siegel, T.;
Kline, R. A.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Elevated expression of matrix metalloproteinase-13
in abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann. Vasc. Surg. 18: 414-420, 2004.

30. Verloes, A.; Sakalihasan, N.; Koulischer, L.; Limet, R.: Aneurysms
of the abdominal aorta: familial and genetic aspects in three hundred
thirteen pedigrees. J. Vas. Surg. 21: 646-655, 1995.

31. Ward, A. S.: Aortic aneurysmal disease: a generalized dilating
diathesis? Arch. Surg. 127: 990-991, 1992.

32. Yoon, S.; Tromp, G.; Vongpunsawad, S.; Ronkainen, A.; Juvonen,
T.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Genetic analysis of MMP3, and PAI-1 in Finnish
patients with abdominal aortic or intracranial aneurysms. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 265: 563-568, 1999.

33. Yoshimura, K.; Aoki, H.; Ikeda, Y.; Fujii, K.; Akiyama, N.; Furutani,
A.; Hoshii, Y.; Tanaka, N.; Ricci, R.; Ishihara, T.; Esato, K.; Hamano,
K.; Matsuzaki, M.: Regression of abdominal aortic aneurysm by inhibition
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Nature Med. 11: 1330-1338, 2005.

*FIELD* CS

Vascular:
   Abdominal aortic aneurysm;
   Generalized dilating diathesis

Misc:
   Estimated 11.6-fold increase among persons with an affected first-degree
   relative

Inheritance:
   Autosomal dominant vs. recessive at an autosomal major locus or multifactorial;
   COL3A1 gene (120180.0004) mutations cause about 2%

*FIELD* CN
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/20/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/25/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/1999
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 5/12/1995

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
terry: 02/02/2012
alopez: 1/11/2012
terry: 12/20/2011
carol: 12/6/2011
terry: 12/2/2011
carol: 9/30/2009
carol: 9/25/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
terry: 1/7/2009
alopez: 3/13/2008
terry: 3/10/2008
wwang: 3/21/2006
terry: 3/20/2006
carol: 12/13/2005
alopez: 12/13/2005
alopez: 12/12/2005
terry: 12/2/2005
terry: 6/27/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
alopez: 1/8/2002
alopez: 1/7/2002
terry: 12/14/2001
carol: 3/28/2000
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/20/1999
carol: 12/28/1998
carol: 12/15/1998
terry: 11/11/1997
terry: 11/10/1997
alopez: 7/9/1997
mark: 10/2/1996
terry: 10/24/1995
mark: 7/11/1995
warfield: 4/6/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 7/13/1993